this is an image of the planet Earth
looks very much like the Apollo pictures
that is very well known there's
something different you can click on it
and if you click on it you can zoom in
almost any place on the earth for
instance this is a bird's eye view of
the EPFL campus in many cases you can
also see how a building looks like from
a nearby street this is pretty amazing
but there's something missing in this
wonderful tool it's time I'm not really
sure when this picture was taken I'm not
even sure it was taken at the same
moment as the bird are you in my lab we
developed tools to travel not only in
space but also through time the kind of
question we're asking is is it possible
to build something like a Google Maps of
the past can I add a slider on top of
Google Map and just change the year sing
out it was 100 years before a thousand
years before is that possible can i
reconstruct social networks of the past
can I make a Facebook of the middle-aged
so can I build time machines maybe we
can just say no it's not possible
or maybe we can think of it from a
information point of view this is what I
call the information mushroom vertically
you have the time and no reason to leave
the amount of digital information
available obviously in the last 10 years
we have many many information and don't
you see the more we go in the past the
less information we have if you want to
build something like a Google map of the
past or Facebook of the past we need to
enlarge this base we need to make that
like a rectangle how can we do that one
way is digitization there's a lot of
material available newspaper printed
books thousands of printing books I can
digitize all these I can extract
information from these of course the
more you go in the past
information you will have so we don't
mind not be enough so I can do what
Estonians do I can extrapolate this is
what we call in computer science
simulation if I take a logbook I can
consider it's not just a log book of a
Venetian captain going to a particular
journey I can consider it's actually a
logbook which is representative of many
journey of that period I'm extrapolating
if I have a painting of a facade I can
consider it's not just that particular
building but probably it's also share
the same grammar of building we lost an
information so if we want to construct a
time machine we need two things
we need very large archives and we need
excellent specialists the Venetian time
machine the project I'm going to talk to
you about is a joint project between the
EPFL and University of Venice CAF Oscar
II there's something very peculiar about
Venice is that its administration has
been very very bureaucratic they've been
keeping trace of everything almost like
Google today at the our caveat is that
oh you have 80 kilometres of archive
documenting every aspect of the life of
Venice over more than a thousand years
you have every bones again goes out
every boat that comes in you have every
change that were made in the city this
is all there we are setting up a ten
year digitization program which has the
objective of transforming this immense
archive into a giant information system
the type of objective we want to reach
is 450 books a day that can be digitized
of course when you digitize that's not
enough because this document most of
them I in Latin in Tuscan in Venetian
dialect so you need to transcribe them
to translate them in some cases to index
them and this is obviously not easy in
particular traditional optical character
recognition method that can be used for
printed manuscript I do not work well on
an written document so the solution is
actually to take inspiration from
another domain speech recognition
this is domain of something that seems
impossible could actually
be done simply by putting additional
constraint if you have a very good model
of the language which is used if you
have a very good model of a document how
the world they are structured and these
are administrative document they're well
structures in many cases if you divide
this use archiving to smaller subsets
where smaller subsets actually share
similar features then there's a chance
of success if we reach that stage that's
something else we can extract from this
document even actually probably 10
billions of in can be extracted from
this archive and this giant information
system can be searched in many ways you
could ask question like who live in this
palace so in 1323 how much costs a
seabream at the Rialto market in 1434
what was the salary of a glass maker in
Milano maybe over a decade you can ask
even bigger question because it will be
semantically coded and then what you can
do is put that in space because many of
these information are spatial and from
that you can do things like
reconstructing this extraordinary
journey of that city that managed to
have a sustainable development over
thousand year managing to have all the
time form of equilibrium with its
environment you can reconstruct that
journey visualized in many different
ways but of course you cannot understand
Venice if you just look at the city you
have to put it in a larger European
context so the idea is also to document
all the thing that works at the European
level we can reconstruct also a journey
of the Venetian maritime Empire I
progressively control yet Adriatic see
how it became the most powerful medieval
empire of its time controlling most of
the sea routes from the east to the
south but you can even do other things
because in these maritime routes there
are regular patterns you can go one step
beyond and actually create a simulation
system create a Mediterranean simulator
which is capable actually of
reconstructing even the information we
are missing which would unable to have
question you can ask like if you were
using a route planner
if I am in Corfu in June 1323 and want
to go to Constantinople where can I take
a boat probably we can answer this
question with one or two or three days
precision how much will it cost what
have a chance of encouraging pirates of
course you understand the central
scientific challenge of a project like
this one is qualifying quantifying and
representing an uncertainty an
inconsistency at each step of this
process there are errors everywhere
errors in the document is the wrong name
of the captain some of the boat never
actually take took the see their error
in translation error introduction
interpretive biases and in top of that
if you add algorithm ik process you're
going to have error in recognition error
in extraction so you have very very
uncertain data so how can we detect and
correct this inconsistency how can we
represent that form of uncertainty it's
difficult one thing you can do is
document each step of the process not
only coding the historical information
but what we call the meta historical
information how is it story core
knowledge constructed documenting each
step that will not guarantee that we
actually converge to what a single story
of Venice but probably we can actually
reconstruct fully documented potential
story of Venice maybe there's not a
single map maybe there's several maps
the system should allow for that because
we have to deal with a new form of a
certainty which is really new for this
type of giant databases and how should
we communicate this new research to a
large audience again Venice is
extraordinary for that with a million of
visitors that comes every year it's
actually one of the best place to try to
invent the Museum of the future imagine
horizontally you see the reconstructed
map of a given Europe and vertically you
see the document that serve as
reconstruction paintings for instance
imagine an immersive system that permits
to go and die
then reconstruct the Venice of a given
year some an expense you could share
within a group
on the contrary imagine actually that
you start from a document a Venetian
manuscript and you show actually what
you can construct out of it how it is
decoded how the context of that document
can be recreated this is an image from
an exhibit which is currently conducted
in Geneva with that type of system so to
conclude we can say that research in
humanities is about to undergo an
evolution which is maybe similar to what
happened to life science 30 years ago
it's really a question of scale we see
projects which are much beyond any
single research team can do and this is
really new for the humanities which are
very often take the habit of working in
small groups or only with a couple of
researchers when you visit the I'll keep
Yoda startled you feel this is beyond
what any single team can do and that
should be a joint and common effort so
what we must do for this paradigm shift
is actually foster a new generation of
digital Romanies they're going to be
ready for this shift thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]